---
layout: post
title: Dynamic Prefix Sums with Fenwick Tree
date: 2023-10-13 06:01:00
description: The Fenwick Tree, also known as the Binary Indexed Tree (BIT), efficiently manages the prefix sum of an array, even as it undergoes updates. In these notes, we introduce this elegant data structure and describe a basic Rust implementation.
tags: rust, algorithms, data-structures
categories: notes
thumbnail: assets/img/fenwick/FT_level_2.svg
giscus_comments: true
---
The *Fenwick Tree*, also known as the *Binary Indexed Tree* (BIT), is a popular and elegant data structure that maintains the prefix sums of a dynamic array[^1]. With this data structure we can update values in the original array and still answer prefix sum queries. Both operations runs in logarithmic time.

[^1]: For an introduction to (static) prefix sums and their applications, take a look at [*'The Power of Prefix Sums'*](/rossano/blog/2023/prefixsums) post.

More precisely, the Fenwick tree solves the following problem.

*We have an array $$A[1,n]$$ of integers, and we would like to support the following operations:*

- *`sum(i)` returns the sum of the elements in $$A[1..i]$$;*
- *`add(i, v)` adds the value $$v$$ to the entry $$A[i]$$.*

The Fenwick tree efficiently handles these queries in $$\Theta(\log n)$$ time while using linear space. In fact, the Fenwick tree is an *implicit* data structure, which means it requires only $$O(1)$$ additional space in addition to the space needed to store the input data (the array $$A$$ in our case).

In our descritpion, we are going to use the following array $$A$$ as a running example. Notice that we are using a one-based indexing for the array.

<div class="row mt-1">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/fenwick/Array.svg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

<br>
#### Two Trivial Solutions
Let's describe two trivial solutions for the problem above.

The first solution simply stores $$A$$ as it is. This way, `sum(i)` is solved by scanning the array in $$\Theta(n)$$ time, and `add(i, v)` is solved in $$O(1)$$ time.

The second solution, instead, stores the prefix-sums of $$A$$. This way, `sum(i)` is solved in $$O(1)$$ time, and `add(i, v)` is solved by modifying all the entries up to position $$i$$ in $$\Theta(n)$$ time.

The `sum`/`add` query time tradeoffs of these solutions are clearly unsatisfactory.


<br>
### Fenwick Tree, Level by Level
The Fenwick Tree provides better tradeoffs for this problem. 
In our description, we will gradually introduce this data structure by constructing it level by level.

To start, let's simplify the original problem slightly. In this variant, we'll focus on solving `sum` queries only for positions that are powers of $$2$$, like positions $$1$$, $$2$$, $$4$$, and $$8$$ in our array $$A$$. The solution of this variant will be the first level of our Fenwick Tree.

The idea for solving this relaxed variant is to sparsify the second trivial solution above, storing only the prefix sums of positions that we need for queries.
The figure below illustrates this solution as a tree, with a fictitious root node named $$0$$ and child nodes named $$1$$, $$2$$, $$4$$, and $$8$$, each storing the sum up to the corresponding power of $$2$$. Additionally, below every node, we provide the range of positions it covers. For instance, node $$4$$ covers positions in the range $$[1, 4]$$.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/fenwick/FT_level_1.svg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

We address the queries of the simplified problem as follows:

- The `sum(i)` query is straightforward. We simply access node $$i$$. Of course, this only works for indexes $$i$$ that are a power of $$2$$.

- For the `add(i, v)` query we need to add $$v$$ to all nodes covering ranges that include position $$i$$. For example, for the query `add(3, 10)`, we add the value $$10$$ to nodes $$4$$ and $$8$$. In general, first we have to find the smallest power of $$2$$ greater than $$i$$, let's call it $$j$$. Then, we add $$v$$ to nodes $$j, 2j, 2^2j, 2^3j, \ldots$$. 

Observe that `sum` takes constanti time and `add` takes $$\Theta(\log n)$$ time. Hooray! We are within our target time complexity. Now, can we extend this solution to support `sum` queries on more positions?

We observe that we're not currently supporting queries for positions within the ranges between consecutive powers of $$2$$. For instance, positions in the range $$[5,7]$$, which fall between $$2^2$$ and $$2^3$$.
But wait! Enabling queries for this subarray is just a smaller instance of our original problem. Therefore, we can apply the same strategy by adding a new level to our tree. If the subarray is $$A[l..r]$$, the new level will support the `sum(i)` query for any $$i$$ such that $$i-l+1$$ is a power of $$2$$.

<div class="row mt-3 ">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/fenwick/FT_level_2.svg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

Our two-level tree can now handle  `sum(i)` queries also for positions that are the sum of two powers of $$2$$. Why? Consider a position $$i$$ expressed as $$2^{k'}+2^{k}$$, where $$k'>k$$. We can decompose the range $$[1,i]$$ into two subranges: $$[1,2^{k'}]$$ and $$[2^{k'}+1,2^{k'}+2^{k}=i]$$. Both of these subranges are covered by nodes in our tree. Specifically, range $$[1,2^{k'}]$$ is covered by node $$2^{k'}$$ at the first level, while $$[2^{k'}+1,2^{k'}+2^{k}=i]$$ is covered by node $$i$$ at the second level.

For example, let's consider the query `sum(5)`. We can handle this in our two-level tree because $$5=2^2+2^0$$. Consequently, the range $$[1,5]$$ is divided into $$[1,4]$$ and $$[5,5]$$, and the result (which is $$6$$) is obtained by summing the values of nodes $$2^2=4$$ and $$2^2+2^0=5$$.

Which positions are still not supported for `sum` queries? Positions that are neither powers of $$2$$ nor the sum of two powers of $$2$$. In our example, with $$n=8$$, only position $$7=2^2+2^1+2^0$$ falls into this category. So, what do we do next? We add a new level to our tree to support queries for positions that are the sum of three powers of $$2$$.

<div class="row mt-3 ">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/fenwick/FT_level_3.svg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

That's all. This is the Fenwick tree for the array $$A$$. Now, let's make some observations:

1. While we've represented our solution as a tree, it can also be represented as an array $$FT$$ of size $$n+1$$, as shown in the figure above.
2. We no longer require the original array $$A$$ because any of its entries $$A[i]$$ can be obtained as $$A[i] = \text{sum}(i) - \text{sum}(i-1)$$. This is why the Fewniwck tree is an *implicit* data structure.
3. Let be $$h$$ equal to $$\lfloor \log (n) + 1 \rfloor$$, which is the length of the binary representation of any position in the range $$[1,n]$$. Since any position can be expressed as the sum of at most $$h$$ powers of $$2$$, the tree has no more than $$h$$ levels. In fact, the number of levels is either $$h$$ or $$h-1$$, depending on the value of $$n$$.


Now, let's delve into the details of how to solve our `sum` and `add` queries on a Fenwick tree.


<br>
#### Answering a `sum` query
Let's start by discussing the `sum(i)` query. Based on the previous discussion, solving this query involves beginning at node $$i$$ and traversing up the tree to reach node $$0$$. Thus, `sum` takes time proportional to the height of the tree, resulting in a time complexity of $$\Theta(\log n)$$.

For a running example, let's take the case where $$i=7$$. We start at node $7$ and move to its parent (node $6$), its grandparent (node $4$), and stop at its great-grandparent (the fictitious node $0$), summing their values along the way. 
This works because the ranges of these nodes ($$[1,4]$$, $$[5,6]$$, and $$[7,7]$$) collectively cover the queried range $$[1,7]$$.

It's important to note that answering a `sum` query becomes straightforward if we were allowed to store the tree's structure. However, a significant part of the Fenwick tree's elegance lies in the fact that storing the tree is not actually necessary. This is because we can efficiently navigate from a node to its parent using a few bit-tricks.
This is the reason why the Fenwick tree is also referred to as the Binary Indexed Tree.

<br>
##### Compute the Parent of a Node
We want to compute the `parent` of a node, and we want to do it quickly and without representing the structure of the tree.

Let's examine the binary representations of the IDs of the nodes involved in answering the previous query.

<div class="row mt-3 ">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/fenwick/FT_bin_1.svg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

Can you find out any pattern? Surprisingly, the binary representation of a node's parent can be obtained by removing the trailing one (i.e., rightmost bit set to <TT>1</TT>) from the binary representation of its children.

Let's explore why this method works.

Suppose we have a node $$i$$, and its range is $$[j,i]$$ for some $$j$$. Its children will be nodes $$i+2^0$$, $$i+2^1$$, $$i+2^2$$, and so on, spanning ranges $$[j+1, i+2^0]$$, $$[j+1, i+2^1]$$, $$[j+1, i+2^2]$$, and so forth. The binary representation of any of these children is identical to that of $$i$$, except for the addition of the trailing one (due to the term $$2^k$$).

Now, we need a clever bit-trick to efficiently obtain the parent of a node. Based on our previous discussion, it's evident that we need a way to remove the trailing one from the binary representation of a node $$i$$. The trailing one can be isolated by computing $$k = i {\tt \&} -i$$. Thus, $$i-k$$ is the parent of $$i$$.

In fact, negative numbers are represented in [two's complement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two%27s_complement) form.
In this representation, the two's complement of a number is obtained by taking the bitwise complement of the number and then adding one to it.

For instance, if we have the binary number $$7$$ as <TT>0111</TT>, its two's complement, which represents $$-7$$, is <TT>1001</TT>.

The key property of the two's complement is that it inverts all the bits in the binary representation of a number, except for the leftmost "trailing one. 
Thus, when we compute the logical AND of a number and its two's complement, only the trailing one survives. Therefore, the final subtraction $$i-k$$ effectively cancels out this bit from $$i$$, as required.

For example,

<div class="row mt-3 ">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/fenwick/FT_bin_2.svg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

<br>
#### Performing an `add`
Now, let's consider the operation `add(i, v)`. We need to add the value of `v` to each node whose range include the position $$i$$.

Certainly, node $$i$$ is one of these nodes since its range ends at $$i$$. Additionally, the right siblings of node $$i$$ also encompass the position $$i$$ in their ranges. This is because siblings share the same starting position, and right siblings have increasing sizes. The right siblings of the parent of node $$i$$, the right siblings of the grandparent, and so on also contain position $$i$$.

It might seem like we have to modify a large number of nodes. However, a simple observation reveals that this number is at most $$\log n$$. This is because, each time we move from a node to its right sibling or to the right sibling of its parent, the size of the covered range at least doubles. And a range cannot double more than $$\log n$$ times.

The figure below shows in red the nodes to modify for teh operation `add(5, _)`.

<div class="row mt-3 ">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/fenwick/FT_add.svg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

Now that we know which are the nodes to modify for `add(i,_)`, let's discuss how to compute these nodes with bit-tricks.

Coninuing the above example, starting from $$i=5$$, the next node to modify is its right sibling, node $$6$$. Let's take a closer look at their binary representations.

<div class="row mt-3 ">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/fenwick/FT_bin_3.svg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

Can you find out any pattern?

It seems that we need to isolate the trailing one in $$5$$, which is <TT>0001</TT>, and add it to $$5$$ to obtain $$6$$. Is this always the correct approach?

Let's try it with another node. The right sibling of the parent of $$6$$ (and, therefore, of $$5$$) is $$8$$.

<div class="row mt-3 ">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/fenwick/FT_bin_4.svg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

The trailing one in $$6$$ is <TT>0010</TT> (i.e., $$2$$) and $$6+2=8$$. Cool!

Why is this method correct? The binary representation of a node and its siblings matches, except for the position of the trailing one. When we move from a node to its right sibling, this trailing one shifts one position to the left. Adding this trailing one to a node accomplishes the required shift, as seen when we add $$5$$ to its trailing one.

Now, consider the ID of a node that is the last child of its parent. In this case, the rightmost and second trailing one are adjacent. To obtain the right sibling of its parent, we need to remove the trailing one and shift the second trailing one one position to the left.

Thankfully, this effect is one again achieved by adding the trailing one to the node's ID.

The time complexity of `add` query is $$\Theta(\log n)$$, as we observe that each time we move to the right sibling of the current node or the right sibling of its parent, the trailing one in its binary representation shifts at least one position to the left. This can occur at most $$\lfloor \log n \rfloor +1$$ times.

<br>
#### Fenwick Tree in Rust
Here, we present a minimal Rust implementation of a Fenwick tree. In this non-generic implementation, we've arbitrarily chosen to use `i64` as the type for the values. While we've transitioned to 0-based indexing for queries, internally, we still use the 1-based indexing to maintain consistency with the notes.

For a more advanced implementation, it could be required to allow generic types and move away from the 1-based indexing. Additionally, there are various potential optimizations to enhance its performance. For more details, refer to [*Practical trade-offs for the prefix-sum problem*](/rossano/assets/pdf/papers/SPE21.pdf).
 
```rust
pub struct FenwickTree {
    tree: Vec<i64>,
}

impl FenwickTree {
    pub fn with_len(n: usize) -> Self {
        Self {
            tree: vec![0; n + 1],
        }
    }

    pub fn len(&self) -> usize {
        self.tree.len() - 1
    }

    /// Indexing is 0-based, even if internally we use 1-based indexing
    pub fn add(&mut self, i: usize, delta: i64) {
        let mut i = i + 1; 
        assert!(i < self.tree.len());

        while i < self.tree.len() {
            self.tree[i] += delta;
            i = Self::next_sibling(i);
        }
    }

    /// Indexing is 0-based, even if internally we use 1-based indexing
    pub fn sum(&self, i: usize) -> i64 {
        let mut i = i + 1;  

        assert!(i < self.tree.len());
        let mut sum = 0;
        while i != 0 {
            sum += self.tree[i];
            i = Self::parent(i);
        }

        sum
    }

    fn isolate_trailing_one(i: usize) -> usize {
        if i == 0 {
            0
        } else {
            1 << i.trailing_zeros()
        }
    }

    fn parent(i: usize) -> usize {
        i - Self::isolate_trailing_one(i)
    }

    fn next_sibling(i: usize) -> usize {
        i + Self::isolate_trailing_one(i)
    }
}
```

<br>
#### Further Readings
- [*A New Data Structure for Cumulative Frequency Tables*](https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.14.8917), Peter M. Fenwick, Software: Practice and Experience, 1994
- [Video description](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CWDQJGaN1gY&ab_channel=TusharRoy-CodingMadeSimple)
- [Fenwick Tree at Visualgo](https://visualgo.net/en/fenwicktree?slide=1)
- [Range Minimum Query with Fenwick Tree](http://ioinformatics.org/oi/pdf/v9_2015_39_44.pdf) and [here](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/15169)
- [*Practical trade-offs for the prefix-sum problem*](/rossano/assets/pdf/papers/SPE21.pdf), G.E. Pibiri and R. Venturini, Journal of Software: Practice and Experience (SPE), 2021

<br>
#### Exercises
- [Update the array](http://www.spoj.com/problems/UPDATEIT/)
- [Nested segments](http://codeforces.com/problemset/problem/652/D?locale=en)
- [Pashmak and Parmida's problem](http://codeforces.com/problemset/problem/459/D?locale=en)